From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 86. Recorded live
Tuesday, September 26, 2011. Support
for Hanselman is provided by
Telerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode
of the startup series, it's
got talks with feel for
tour creator of post sharp.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman,
and this is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
via the magic of Skype
from the other side of
the world, we have Gail
for two from sharp crafters
creator of post sharp. How
are you, sir? I'm great.
How are you? I'm very
well. I'm happy to be
talking to you. I'm a
big fan. We have lots
to talk about, but this
is still part of the
startup series and I thought
it would be great to
talk to you because you're
an open source person. Who's
done software that I've used
in the open source world,
but not all. You also
have a company built around
that. So I want to
understand that transition that you
made and, and then we'll
talk a little bit about
the product and what it
does and what the future
is. So start me out
by just telling me what
it is that you built.
So we've been post-harvest, which
is a post compiler or
an aspect 20 framework. So
what it does is that
it, it allows you as
a developer to produce code
with less boiler plate code.
So when you think of
a feature like implementing notified
properly change or undo, redo,
always have to write the
same three lines of code.
So three nights ago, there's
nothing, but it happens for
every single property of every
class and they, so these
can turn into thousands of
lines of code. And actually
there, there is a better
way to write code it's
to recognize that there is
an implementation pattern there. And
then, so the tool we
make allows you to well
to implement the design patterns
so that the code is
actually generated automatically and does
not pollute your source code.
So this is, this is
post sharp, and this is
aspect oriented programming. So aspect
oriented programming. I I've heard
it referred to in the
terms of cross cutting concerns.
Like people think about things
vertically when creating object orientation
and this derives from that,
and that derives from this
other thing, but aspect oriented
programming, logging is used as
an example. This is something
that doesn't fit into the
vertical hierarchy, but instead cuts
across aspects of the entire
application. Is that a good
way to express that? Yes,
exactly. So, so the, the,
the principle design principle in,
in software engineering is the
separation of concerns. So when
we think of a feature,
we would like to see
a single artifact of implementation.
For instance, when you, when
we think of customer management,
you would like to see,
say a single namespace. Then
when we go finder in
your features, we go to
find your artifacts like a
class mattered and so on.
So what we want is
a nice separation of concerns,
but when we think about
logging or transaction handling or
exception handling, notify probiotic change,
and do we do security.
So we have this concerns
that cross-cut all the business
functions of the program. And
in, in object oriented jargon,
we call that crosscutting concerns.
So these are the features
that are common to old
business features, and that cannot
be addressed vertically by classes,
procedures, methods. And that's, that's
why, well, a team in
Palo Alto started to think
about this problem in 2001.
And they, they, they came
with the principles of aspect
20 programming. And so there
are very strong implementations in,
in Java. And while Paul's
sharp is the implementation will
the strongest implementation in, dotnet
not the only one, but
the most nimble comprehensive for
microsoft.net. When did you create
this? Did you, were you
working on a project and
you said to yourself, this
is a need and I'm
going to make it, and,
and how did it become
open source? Oh, it's, it
started immediately as open source.
I S I started with
when I was a developer
in a telecom company and
I had to implement provisioning
processes, and I felt the
need to do some, some
more interesting code, more low
level codes. So I picked
a problem and I started
playing with that. This was
back in 2004 and after
a like nine months or
one year. So, so I
did it every evening, one
or two harbors. And after
one year, I, I noticed
that, that people were interested
in the product and we've
done loads, started conversations on
the support forum. So some
companies wanted to sponsor the
project to develop features that
they would use. And so
gradually it became much more
and more important. And after
I think it was three
years in 2007, then, then
I, I decided to leave
my full time job at
a telecom company and start
as a freelancer. And the
idea at the beginning was
to devote 40% of my
time to the open source
project. So not being paid.
And so to invoice the
customer is 60% of that
time of the whole time.
And so this balance worked
during two years and then,
well, the six is what
continued to continue to grow.
And so 40% was not
announced. So it was 50
60. And at that point,
well, I had to realize
that it was not possible
to, to, to make a
living on just 40% of
my time. So and so,
so users were pushing for
more support, more features, a
more, a stronger commercial foundation.
So I decided to, to
create a company on the
existing product. And so what
I did there is to,
is to contact a business
angel with large experience in,
in software startups. And I
started working on a new
version. So the open source
version is still, is still
available. Now it is still
three. It is not supported
anymore. So we did the
new version with new features.
And after nine months, as
I think of, of development
and testing, we, we started
selling this, this, this new
version. Okay, well, there's a
couple of interesting things there
you've got, you've just shared
us a lot of information.
Let me start a little
bit farther back. You, you
have the open source project,
it became quite popular. So
you decided to quit your
full time job, do consulting,
and then hope that the
consulting would support your work
on the open source project.
Was your, was your consulting
exclusively in the area of
aspect oriented programming, or was
it just general consulting? It
was connected to a post
harm itself at the beginning.
It was the main, the
main topic of, of, of
the contract. And then I
started working on, on very
different features that were not
related to the product. So,
so the open source project
helped me to get visibility
in the.net community and to
get better contracts that that
would allow me to work
only with 60% is instead
of of 100. And I
think that's, that's something that's
what if you talk with,
with open source contributors, they
will tell you the same
story. When you start contributing
to a significant project, or
you start a significant project
on your own, you get
huge visibility and you, and
then you get opportunities that
you will not get. If
you just follow the, the
past that your manager, what
it has for you, or
that you could achieve in
your own local city, But
why it seems like a
very straightforward business that you're
trying to make here. You
have a project that's popular,
it's open source. You have
an, you have an engaged
user base. So you'll consult
part of the time and
then work on your open
source part of the time.
But then you said it
became 40%, 50%, 60%. Why
was it, why was the
work overwhelming the open source
project? Why did the percentage
go up like that Much,
much of the work came
from social supporting frameworks is
an issue and creating your
features. So when you start
a project, I think that's
what any project, when you
don't have any, any user,
then you, then you don't
have any legacy. It's very
easy to create the first,
well, the first lines of
code. Then, then when you
have users, anything you add
to the project? Well, it
has a quadratic cost. Nope.
The, so the marginal cost
of implementing a feature is
actually a function of, of
the legacy code base. That's
something quite common in, in,
in software development. So when
the project became two years
old and the user were,
were, were counted in, in
thousands, it, it started to
require significant afford to what
support new frameworks like civil
light at this time was
new windows. Azure was new.
There were specific requirements for
the first versions of windows
Azure, and then companies or
developers start using the product
in companies. And that they
want some kind of guaranteed
that the project will continue
to be maintained in a
future. And a commercial company
seems a better guarantee for
them. So, so there were
both sources of pressure that
will the time. And also
the telling, you know, we
are, we are waiting for
a commercial version. Okay. So
that's where it starts getting
interesting, because I think that
a lot of the listeners
are probably either involved in
an open source project or
they are interested in getting
involved. We all know that
it's easier to work on
an open source project, or
at least get started than
it is to find a
job. So a number of
people want to get experience,
or as you said, to
get visibility, they work in
an open source project. But
then when a project gets
to a certain size or
a certain popularity enterprises and
companies and large commercial entities
demand more, they expect more,
they want an organization behind
it, whether it be, you
know, like a, like an
Apache foundation or a outer
curve foundation, or eclipse, or
an actual commercial entity. But
when you transition between open
source and commercial, don't, you
risk losing a lot of
people. As you know, you
might gain some, but you
could also lose your base.
Oh yes, you are. When,
when you make that transition,
you are changing your audience.
So indeed we, we, we
lost a lot of users
and we loaded what's what's
called well, the community karma
during the first six months.
But then we had to
develop different strategies to, to
what, to get an audience
and a way to recover
and to gain a new
audience. So it's, it's, it
is, it is risky. It
is not a guaranteed success,
but before doing the transition,
there is that there is
something that will, I tried
unsuccessfully, but what are some
other people with eventual project
did successfully? What I tried
before is to try to
sell support on the free
product. And so during six
months, there was a commercial
version of the product with
a commercial licensing, and that
came with, with support. But
actually I sold three, five
licenses. You know, it was,
it was not enough to
make a living. So this
was in 2008, I think.
And I, there was a
kind of belief in the
community that when you do
open source project, you can
make a living out of
support. And for me, it
turned out to be, to
be wrong. And if you
think about that, making a
living out of support is
kind of a lose, win
situation. You are winning because
your customer is losing when
your customer calls support is
probably means that he's frustrated
that he has had problem
and needs help. I think
developers don't, don't like to
contact support. They, so we
are kinds of people who
like to solve problems ourselves.
So this is something that
does, for me, did not
work. And what worked was
to we're stuck with the
open source edition and, and
we'll take to people, Hey,
we made investments in the
new version. If you want
to, to get the new
features is going to be
for a fee. And if
you don't want, then you
have two possibilities. You have
the old version that was
still available and it's still
for, I guess, users. And
then there is a free
edition. So we moved from
an open source model to
what premium, a freemium edition
and a professional edition. Okay.
So the old version is
frozen in time, right? It's
it's, it's done. Has it
been forked and moved in
another direction or is it
simply finished? No, it is.
It is finished. Some folks
in the community made a
copy in  and your
repository, but no one had
had taken over the code.
And so this, this version
is dead, but I think
still, I think up to
50% of people who are
using post route every day,
still use the old version
And then it will eventually
die when something in the
framework changes that is simply
unsupported and no one fixes
it, I assume. Yes. So
it doesn't support.net for Oh,
so that means that there
is still a large number
of, of, of developers that
work on the three to
five stack. Hi, this is
Scott coming to you from
another place in time. Are
you using agile practices to
manage your software development? There's
lots of tools in the
market that manage the steps
of a project, but most
of them focus on individual
roles, get ready for a
solution that caters for the
success of the whole team.
Guys at Tellerik introduced team
pulse. It's an agile project
management tool. That'll help you
gather ideas, estimate plan, track
progress, and a common workspace.
Finally, companies, regardless of their
size can use a lightweight
and convenient tool that makes
all the stakeholders work as
a United team. Even if
they're in different countries by
combining intuitive user interface and
the power server light team
poles removes the roadblocks that
you typically face and applying
agile in an effective manner,
no more lost data, no
disparate systems, no lack of
critical analytics regarding the health
and philosophy project. See if
yourself get a free copy
for five users in one
project at tellerik.com/team pulse. And
please do thank tolerance for
supporting Hansel minutes on their
Facebook fan page, facebook.com/t L
E R I K Keller.
We do appreciate it. They
wouldn't be a handsome and
it's, if there wasn't, Tellerik
helping us, what kind advice
would you give to someone
out there who's listening who
has open source and they
built something significant and they
start to think about, well,
I've done all this free
work and I've got all
this fame, but I don't
have any money should, should,
should every open source project
when it gets to a
certain level of popularity switch
to commercial. I don't think
so because, because I, I
have seen different moderns working
well. Well, it's, it's it's
of course, if it were
difficult to, to see if
something works well commercially without
knowing the internal numbers, and
you will never know them,
but so you can get
a very high popularity and
thanks for your popularity, what
become a so famous concert,
and you can offer a
training. This can be a
more profitable business model than
turning commercial then, but then
if you were turning commercially,
you, you may have, so
you, so you may lose
a part of, of your
audience for a part of
your audience. You turn from
a hero to do a
household because you, what it
used to be three, and
now it's commercial. And, and
there is a minority of,
of people that will send
you a silly emails that
you are not a good
guy anymore, but this is
a minority. This is, this
is maybe a 5% of
the users who will do
the opposite and telling that
this is the right move
to do. So, should you
move your opensource project to
what? To commercial? I would
say it's, it's not an,
an, an abused choice first
thinking about the other strategies
you have and think about
the, Nope. Are you able
to get contributors for your
projects? Because in case of
post sharp, it was so
low level. And so what
is so complex that I,
I have not been able
to get contributors in the
project when I decided to,
to switch to open source.
So at that time I
was author of 99, 7%
of the source code. See,
that's interesting because even simple
projects and popular projects, basic
things like, like nerd dinner,
my silly little example, you
know, we've had people contribute
over the years, but in
the last year it's been
me and John Galloway and two
other, very nice guys from
the community, John Peterson and Peter
Morefield. And you would think
I would have 30, 40,
50 people, you know, sending
me a code, but it
just doesn't happen. And then
if you, if you, if
you, if you turn up
the difficulty like something with
an aspect oriented project, you're,
you're making the pool of
people that you can choose
from smaller and smaller. And
then you find yourself all
alone with a project that
has thousands and thousands of
users. Exactly. So, so there
is a point where, where,
where you have to realize
that if you want the
project to continue and just
to be alive and to
grow into, and to, to
get adapted to the new
features of the.net platform at
the minimum, then you need
to pay people because the
contributors will not to not
come, or you could find
some kind of contributors that
will tell you, well, give
me a task and I
will do that. And so
you have to do nearly
micromanagement and you are losing
more time that you are
gaining. So this, this was
the situation in 2006, seven
at the time where a
sold force was, was the
hub of, of opensource development.
How do you, when you
transition from open source to
commercial, do you, do you
close the source and how
do you do that? It
was a source actually, you
need to be the only,
the only contributor, because otherwise
you don't have the right
to do that. So, so
you, so you need the
agreement of all contributors and
is better. If, if, if
it's a small number and
then you can change the
license because when the copyright
owners can change the license.
So, so what I did
is to create a new
version based on the old
version, of course, but within,
it was a differential license.
I consider doing a part
of the product sitting open
source and doing the add
ins in close source. But
I was not able to
find an architecture where the
license would so that when
the commercial features will not
be like cross-cutting to the
free ones and that there
could be a separation of
license in the separation of
code. So that's the only
thing that could work in
some software. For instance, you
can make an open source
ERP and make commercial plugins,
but in the case of
post sharp, this was not
possible. Okay, well, let's, let's
spend a little time talking
about post sharpen, what it
does. We talked a little
bit about aspect oriented programming,
but if I understand correctly,
if there's anything that you
want in your source to,
to change the behavior of
the entire application with, like
you said, security or logging
or exception management, these are
almost like, like plugins, but
they don't plug in. Again,
I use the term vertically
in the sense of they
don't plug into the hierarchy,
necessarily they slice all the
way through the application. Like
you could turn on detailed
logging in your application, but
is it correct? You can
do it without changing the
source and really you could
do it without ever seeing
it. So in imposter version
two, which is the current
version, it is principally based
on custom attributes. So at
least you need one custom
attribute insight. For instance, your
assembly info that CS that's
the minimum you need. There
is a trick to do
it without that, but it
is not the, the way
it is supposed to work.
So in impulse shop to
the system is designed to
modify a program whose you
have the source code. So
not, not an arbitrary program,
this is, this is something
that, that will change in
Paul's shop tree. We will
allow for modification of whatever
that impulse shop to it
is designed as a development
tool, not as a, as
a monitoring tool, which would
let you to analyze whatever,
like whatever code, for instance,
SharePoint who always having the
source code. So, so post
sharp is very oriented to,
with, with custom attributes, but
it doesn't mean that you
need to add a custom
attribute to every method you
need to target. Typically, if
you want to do logging
of everything, you would put
a custom attribute at the
SMB level, a single customer
attribute, and then you will,
you have filters. So you
can see you, you can
say that you want to
trace only public metals, or
you can do more complex
things. You can, you can
use a reflection at the
build time. This is, this
is quite, quite cool because
when it post chaperones at,
at build time. So just,
just after the C sharp
compiler, so you can write
code that executes, inciteful sharp.
And so you can inspect
the assembly using reflection, and
you can add the aspects
wherever it is. It is
relevant based on C sharp
code. So you, so you
can do very, very fun
stuff. Like you can do
a link query over reflection
that returns a set of
aspect. For instance, Help me
understand where this fits into
the process. Because for most
people they write source, they
run it through the compiler
from the company that they,
you know, they bought the
software from Microsoft. So they
run it through Microsoft's compiler
and it makes I, it
makes intermediate language. And then
that's the end of it.
Where do you, where do
you fit in? So it's
so post sharp runs just
after the compiler, it reads
the MSI, it transforms it,
and then it tries it
back. So when it, conceptually
it can be a, it
can be understood as an
extension of the compiler, but
technically it runs as a
post compilation step w which
is post sharp post C
sharp. Okay. So it's post
compilation. So you're literally taking
the binary or what, what,
what we, let me rephrase
what we think of as
the binary, which is really
just this container full of
oil. You open it up
and you change the resulting
code. You change the code
that C-sharp made in injecting
in your own aisle, weaving
in as a, as it
were your own aisle. How
can I then debug that?
So that's, that's quite easy
because when Paul's hot, he
writes the PDB file. So
when it, when Paul's shrub
injects interactions, it also injects
sequence points. So it updates
the mapping between the binary
and the source code. So
actually when, when you debug
that you, you just, it,
it just works as usually,
but you have the aspects
there. So if you step
into a method and there
is an aspect of the
method, you will get into
the aspect, and then the
aspect will call for instance,
proceed. For instance, you can
make a caching aspect that
intercepts the method you are
on the method. You click
on, step into you, get
into the aspect. And then
when, when the caching aspect
calls proceed, because what the
metal is not cached and
needs to be executed, and
then you step into proceed
and you get back into
the method, and then you
can step as usually It's
really seamless. I mean, if
it, I assume that if
it broke anything from the
debugging experience, people would be
less likely to use it,
but you're saying I can
hit F 11 and go
right into the aspect. And
It's just fine. Yes. You
can put break phones. Usually
if you don't want to
step into an aspect every
time, because you don't know
is there, and you don't
want to debug that, then
you can use the custom
attributes of the system, diagnostics,
namespace, for instance, debuggers step
through. And so, and so
stepping into will not step
into the aspect. Well, why
would I want to use
aspect oriented programming, as opposed
to perhaps building in my
own plugin model, to like
meth, using meth, to plug
things into a, to my
application, why would I pick
aspect of any programming over
designing my own model to
inject code in, or, or,
or at least load code
into to my space? So
if, if you use a
dependency injection framework, you aren't
able to do inject behaviors
between the client and the
service. So because the, so
dependency injection works this way,
that, that the client requests
requests an interface to the
container and the container when
normally returns the implementation. But
the container, if there is
an aspect on the implementation
or on the service, he
would, he would return a
proxy and the proxy would
call them up the logging
and so on. But that
means that you are limited
to what, to adding behaviors,
to first to the communication
between a client and a
service. It means not to
private methods, not to a
static methods, not to WPF
control. So the set of
points to which you can
add aspects, it's actually pretty
limited. And is this something
that I should be concerned
about as a developer or
are aspects meant to just
simply fade into the background
and that I simply forget
that they're there. I mean,
I guess I would be
concerned that something would happen
that I would be unable
to debug When, when, when
we talk with longtime customers,
so people who have been
using  for three, four
years, they, they tell me
the main benefit is not
the number of lines of
code that, that you decrease.
The main benefit is that
the knowledge required by a
new team member is lower.
So they have new team
members who don't understand aspect
20 programming. Don't need to
understand what is an aspect.
And it's only after six
to nine months that they
ask, Hey, how much transaction
handling so implemented anyway, because
it's not in the code,
it just happens magically. So,
but, but so during his
six, nine months, the new,
the new team member was
able to do good code
without requiring large learning of,
you know, merchant treading caching
for induction and link. It
was just there. So the
architect just put the aspects
on the business objects and
were told, I want to
trace this, this needs to
be transactional. So it can
be a real benefit that
you don't need to know
that the aspects is there.
That's interesting because it's, it's
another kind of abstraction. I
was going to say another
layer of abstraction, but it's
another, another kind of abstraction.
And I think that abstractions
are the whole point of
what the computer is supposed
to be doing. It's supposed
to do the work for
you. That's not fun. And,
you know, logging is no
fun and transactions are no
fun. So why not hide
that? Do, do you, do
you have any thoughts on
why aspect oriented programming hasn't
taking the world by fire?
Like why everyone isn't using
it? I think one of
the reasons was that it
has been designed by, by
academic researchers at the Xerox
Palo Alto laboratory. And the
first implementations were academic with
very, I think, cumbersome con
concepts so that the, so
that the learning curve was
very, very steep at the
beginning. And so when, when
I started to design post
Sharvin in 2004 or five,
I looked at that stuff
and what I thought to
myself, cause I've, I've been
programming since, since eight of
11. So I have kind
of what problem was mine
before being so an engineer.
So I'll say, so I
thought to myself, that's, that's
not the way that that
should be done because in
dotnet we have custom attributes.
We can, we can make
maybe it's much more natural
for programmers to use without
introducing new concepts. And so
I designed a very light
weight, a lightweight version of
a spectrum, anti programming that
was called Laos lightweight aspect
oriented system. And this started
to be popular. These version,
none, the complex one that
existed back then, for instance,
aspect of DNG or aspect
sharp and aspect J clones,
this simple version became popular.
So I think there was
a communication problem at the
beginning, so that many people
that got maybe burned by
beta complexity. But now if
I, so if I look
at at will the industry,
that's the tower when all
best customers or, or more
frequent one, it's actually not
the software development industry that
this is finance and healthcare.
So people doing business software,
this is where, what EOP
is the most useful, Right?
Big enterprises where the work
needs to get done. And
there are crosscutting concerns that
can be created by the
architect or another group so
that the business person can
focus on the business problem.
And the other issues can
be handled by the software.
Exactly. Well, thank you so
much for chatting with me
today. Folks can go up
to sharp crafters.com and you
can download the free starter
edition of pro sharp and
check it out. It's a
pretty amazing piece of software.
And if you look there
on the homepage, you've got
folks like again, day from
then hibernate does singing its
praises. So I would encourage
you to check out a
post sharpen. Thanks so much
Gail Frito for coming on
the show and talking about
your, your starting, Thank you,
Scott. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.